Hello, everyone, in this lesson, we are going to begin working on our chat feature, let's jump right
into the action.
When I logged in user clicks on this chat icon up in the header bar, I would want to display a chat
box down in the bottom right corner of the screen.
Now, we can actually break this chat feature up into two parts.
Part one is just user experience and visual design.
Right.
We just need to respond to the click event of this icon and then show the HTML and success that will
build the chat box interface.
That's what we're going to focus on in this first part of the lesson in the next video, we can work
on the actual technology that will allow for two way communication of data in real time.
OK, but right now, let's begin working on the user experience aspect.
Let me show you where I would begin.
So in your text editor, within your views folder, I want you to look in the includes subfolder and
I want you to jump into footer SJS right below the closing footer tag.
And right above all these scripts, I want you to add a new line and let's write an if statement to
see if the current visitor is logged in.
Right.
Because we only want the chat feature to be available if you are logged in.
So to begin, let's drop in to SJS and let's say if parentheses, curly brackets and for the condition
in the parentheses, we can just say user.
Now, within the if block, we'd want to include a bit of HTML for the chat feature.
So at the end of this line, let's be sure to drop out of Ejaz.
And then at the start of this line, let's jump back into SJS.
And now on this line, we are free to include a bit of HTML.
Let's create a div.
So opening and closing div tag and on the opening tag, let's give it an I.D. So ID equals quotes of
chat Dasch wrapper.
OK, and then for styling or design reasons, let's also give it a few classes.
So class equals quotes and then type these classes out with me.
So chat Dasch wrapper space.
Shadow space border.
Top space border left space border.
Right.
OK, and that's it.
There is no actual content in between the opening and closing div tags.
We can add that on the fly a bit later with browser based JavaScript.
For now, let's go ahead and save this file and now let's go create a new browser based JavaScript file
that is dedicated to the chat feature.
We already have a dedicated folder where we can do this.
So from the root of your project, look for the folder that is named Front End Dash G.S. and then look
within the modules folder.
You should see that this is where we already have created search dogs.
So let's just create another new file in this modules folder.
So if I.
Right.
Click on modules, choose new file, I will name the new file chat JS within this brand new file.
Let's set up a general skeleton.
So we'd want to export something so that this code is available from our main JavaScript file.
So let's say export default class and then let's say uppercase chat and then curly brackets within these
curly brackets.
Let's include a constructor.
So constructor parentheses, curly brackets for now in the constructor.
Let's just include an annoying alert pop up that says chat feature is loading.
OK, now below the constructor, but still within the overall curly bracket for the class.
Let's include a comment and say events so we can just create a method with the name of event.
So events, parentheses, curly brackets and then below events.
Let's also include a comment that says methods.
OK, before we save this, let's be sure to call the events method within the constructor.
So in the constructor, I would just add a line and say this dot events parentheses to call it cool.
Let's go ahead and save this file.
And now let's jump into our main JS file and import this file.
So look within your front end dash JS folder and not inside the modules folder, but just inside front
SJS.
We see a file named Main JD.
Let's jump into that up at the very top.
Let's import in that new chat file.
So import uppercase chat from and then we just give it a file path, so quotes and then dot slash module's
slash chat.
OK, now down here, let's write an if statement to only leverage this if that Chhatrapati exists in
the footer or page template.
Right.
That if statement that we just set up in the footer this way we only bother executing the chat JavaScript
if a visitor is logged in.
So I would just write an if statement.
So if parentheses curly brackets for the condition I would just say if document dot query selector that
gets its own set of parentheses and then quotes and then to look for an idea, just say hash tag chadash
wrapper.
So this will only evaluate to true if that element exists.
OK, and then in the curly brackets for the if block I would just say let's create a new instance of
uppercase chat.
Cool.
Let's go ahead and give this a save.
And now as long as your NPM run watch task is running, that should automatically create a new updated
bundle JavaScript file.
So back in the browser, if I refresh, I should see that annoying alert.
Yep.
Chat feature is loading.
Perfect.
Next, let's use browser based JavaScript to add a bit of HTML into that empty chat div that lives in
the footer.
Let me show you what I mean.
So within our footrot file, remember, if the users logged in there is a div, but for the time being
it's completely empty.
There's nothing in between the opening and closing div tags.
So let's do this within our new chat JS file within the constructor.
Let's get rid of this test alert message and instead let's create a property.
Let's say this dot chat wrapper equals and then let's select that empty div.
So document query selector quotes and then hash tag chat wrapper.
Remember hash tag is how you can select an element based on its IDE, whereas a dot is how you can select
element based on its class.
OK, now right below this line, let's call a method that doesn't exist yet, but we can create it in
just a minute or two.
So let's say this dot inject each HTML.
OK, now down in our methods area, let's just create a method with that matching name so we can just
say inject html parentheses, curly brackets within the body of this method.
Let's just say this dot chat wrapper dot inor each html equals and then let's include back ticks within
the two back ticks.
You're free to drop down and I'll push enter once again.
So we have an empty line here.
All right.
And now instead of typing out a bunch of HTML with you, let's actually just copy and paste a bit from
a file up on GitHub.
So within the same repository that we've been working with throughout this course.
Right.
GitHub, dotcom, slash, learn web code, slash JavaScript, dig into the O2 complex app folder and
then go into the O1 HTML templates folder.
And right now the file that we're interested in is Chat Dasch Visible HTML.
From here you can click on the raw button to see just the text for this file and then we want to scroll
down towards the bottom.
So here we see an HTML comment that reads Chat feature begins.
We already have this div with an idea of chat wrapper, but look right below that line of code here
we see a div with the class of chat title bar and then it says chat and it has a span.
I want you to select this entire line into your clipboard, so let me copy that.
And then for your reference, if I go back a page.
Within this view of GitHub, you can see the line that I'm referring to is line number fifty nine.
That's what I want you to copy into your clipboard, OK?
And then back in our text editor within the two back ticks, let's just paste in our clipboard.
OK, now, below this.
I do want you to include a few more lines of HTML, so manually type this out with me.
Let's say div opening and closing div tag, and I want you to give the opening tag an idea of simply
chat.
And then I also want you to give it a class of Chadash log.
So this is where all the actual chat messages will get added.
OK, now below this div let's add a form.
So this will include the text field that you actually type your messages into the form contains a decent
bit of HTML.
So instead of typing this out by hand, let's actually dig back into that file and GitHub.
So within this template on GitHub, if you look around line number five, you will see an opening form
element and it goes from eighty five down to line number eighty seven.
So I just want you to select those three lines of code into your clipboard.
Go ahead and copy that back in your text editor.
Go ahead and paste.
Cool.
If you need to pause the video for a moment just to make sure that your HTML looks like this, that's
OK.
But at this point, let's go ahead and save this file and reload in the Web browser.
So refresh now we do not see the chat box visually yet, but if you write, click anywhere on the Web
page and choose, inspect and then in your developer tools, look for the footer element right below
the footer element.
We see a div with an idea of chat wrapper.
Now, just as a test, if I double click on the value for its class attributes and then at the start
of this value, if I give it a class of maybe chat dash dash visible and then push enter.
Well look at that.
Now the chat is visible.
Now, obviously we don't expect the visitors of our website to manually go into their web dev tools
and add a class like that.
But we now have an idea of what we can do when the user clicks on this chat icon in the header.
So let me refresh again to hide the chat box.
So let's jump back into our JavaScript file and set things up so that when the user clicks on this chat
icon, we add that visible class to the chat wrapper.
So back in our text editor within Chat JS, let's scroll up to the very top and within our constructor,
let's select that icon up in the header.
So I will say this dot open icon and set that equal and then document dot query selector and it has
a class so dot it has a class of header dash chadash icon.
OK, now within our events area, let's just set up a listener that listens for that icon getting clicked
on.
So within our events method we can just say this dot open icon dot add event listener.
This takes two arguments.
So Akama be the first argument instead of this, a placeholder would be the event that we are listening
for.
In this case, it's a click event and then instead of the B placeholder, this is a function that we
would want to run in response.
So let's get rid of this placeholder B and let's actually begin with an arrow function.
So parentheses arrow symbol.
And if we're on the same line, we don't need curly brackets and this method doesn't exist yet, but
we can create it in just a moment.
So let's call this dot show chat parentheses to actually call that method OK.
And now down in our methods area, let's create a method with this name show chat.
So down here I would just say show chat, parentheses, curly brackets.
And within the body of this method, I'd just say this dot chat wrapper, dot class list, dot add and
I'd give it a class of chat, dash dash visible.
So that's two dashes.
Let's give this a save and go test it out.
So back in the browser be sure to refresh.
And now when I click the chat icon up in the header perfect.
It opens the chat box.
Next lets set things up so that when I click on this x right here it closes or hides the chat box.
So back in our.
Ed, up at the very top of this file within our constructor, let's create a property for that close
icon.
So this dot close icon equals document dot query selector.
And I can let you know that it has a class of so dot to select the class and its chat dash title.
Dash Bardash close.
OK, now let's set up an event listener for that element.
So within our events area, let's add a new line.
Let's say this dot close icon dot add event listener.
We're going to give it to arguments.
The first argument is the event that we're listening for, which is click and then the second argument
is a function.
Now to recap the reason I'm going to use an arrow function here is because I do not want to modify that
this keyword.
I still want this to point towards our object, not the element that got clicked on.
And remember, an arrow function does not modify that this keyword.
So let's get rid of the placeholder, provide an arrow function, and then this method doesn't exist
yet.
But let's call this dot hyd chat parentheses to actually call that method OK.
Then down within our methods area, let's just create a new method to give it a name of hide chat,
parentheses, curly brackets, and then you can actually just copy and paste this line of code.
So select that copy, paste it here.
The only difference is instead of adding that class so we want to change add to remove, we want to
get rid of that class that makes it visible.
Let's give this a save and then test it out.
So back in the browser, if I refresh, I can click this to open the chat and then I should be able
to click the X icon to hide the chat.
It's not working.
I think I know what the issue is back up at the very top of our chat JS file on this line of code within
the constructor when I'm trying to select that close icon.
Well, when this line of code runs, this element doesn't even exist yet because this method is what
injects that HTML.
So we just need to cut and paste this line to live below this line.
So cut the this close icon line into your clipboard and then just paste it right below.
When we call this dot inject HTML.
So new line and then just paste right here.
OK, let's give this save and test it out again.
So if I refresh the front end I can open the chat.
If I click this I can close the chat.
Now in our next video, we are going to work on the actual technology that will power the communication
of data for the chat.
But before we get to that, there's one more thing I want to do in this part of the lesson.
Let's set things up so that the first time the user opens the chat, a special function runs that can
open a connection to the server.
But then if a user just started spamming, closing and opening and closing and opening the chat, we
wouldn't want to create a new connection.
Each time the chat was opened, we'd only want to run that open connection function the first time they
open the chat.
Let me show you what I'm getting at and how I would set that up.
So in our text editor within our constructor, I would just create a property, maybe name it, this
dot opened yet and by default, let's set this to false.
OK, then let's find our show chat method.
And then within this method, let's write an if statement.
Let's say if parentheses curly brackets for the condition.
We can just say if this dot opened yet, let's check for the opposite of that.
So only if it's set to false would we want to do something in this case, let's call a method that doesn't
exist yet.
But let's say this dot open connection.
OK, then after the if block, let's add a new line and just set this dot opened yet to equal.
True.
So as soon as the chat is opened, this property is set to true.
But the very first time you open it, it will be set to false.
So this will actually run.
And then just as a test, we can create a method with this name of open connection.
So maybe down here let's create a brand new method, open connection, parentheses, curly brackets,
just as a test.
Let's create an alert pop up that says opening a connection.
Cool.
Let's go ahead and save this and test it out.
So if I refresh the very first time I open the chat box, I do see that annoying alert opening up connection.
But if I close the chat and then reopen it again, I do not see that alert each time.
Perfect.
This sets the stage for the next part of this lesson where we will open a connection to the server to
allow for two way communication of data.
This is going to be a lot of fun to set up.
So let's keep things rolling and I will see you in the next lesson.